thank you caitlin really excited to be
here so uh as kaitlyn mentioned i'm
chief product officer at
a big part of my focus over the last uh
four and a half years since i joined the
company has been really
helping us transform our business from a
software business into a cloud services
and sas companies so uh
this is a lot about kind of that
transformation and um
my friend javier introduced himself has
been a big part of that journey
on the go to market side so my name my
name is javier molina i
i'm the svp of corporate sales and for
mongodb what that means is uh it's
it's really companies under 1500
employees but i'm here representing
sales
as we have enterprise coverage and and
uh countries like emerging markets like
latim and apac but uh yeah working with
working with sahir it's been quite the
journey and we're happy to be here cool
so uh we'll get into the content here so
just a little bit of an overview of some
of the kind of key themes
we hope to kind of touch upon in this
presentation
first and foremost you know we wanted to
describe sort of how
our company and our technology mongodb
really started with
open source as sort of like a seating
mechanism for
driving or adoption in the market and
building the foundation of the early
phases of monetization for the company
going back you know five six seven years
now
uh well obviously double click quite a
bit into how sas and shifting our
delivery model and business model over
to that has really been a revolutionary
sort of process in the company and the
impact that time had there
and uh we'll touch on some of the things
we're thinking about now you know by no
means do we think this journey is over
and a lot of what
you know we're focused on these days is
really optimization and scaling
sort of what we think of is almost an
omni-channel distribution and revenue
model that we've built
over the last four years in particular
so hopefully
this color and context is helpful and
we'll kind of phase everything into
these sort of three
key themes so just for context mongodb
is an open source database technology
company i'm sure many of you have heard
the brand perhaps and you know it's very
much
adopted by developers building modern
applications
and you know over 10 years ago when the
initial technology was released
in open source there was honestly a
quite a bit of an open question in the
market about whether you could
build an open source free technology for
developers
and scale massive adoption and developer
love while at the same time building a
sustainable business
it sounds kind of crazy that you know
i'm opening this
this conference of this talk up that way
but it's not as obvious that that's
possible now and uh
you know it wasn't as obvious back then
as it is now that that was actually
possible so
you know that was kind of a key thought
early days in the company in the
foundation of the
founders is how do you balance those two
seemingly at times in compatible
concepts
so if you look at our journey going back
about 10 years
11 years now the first phase for this
technology company was really around
driving adoption
you know for those of you who may not be
familiar with the technology itself
mongodb presents a very different way of
doing things uh
in the database market and the
established model you know we
typically refer to as relational
databases have been around for 30 40
years so it's a very entrenched sort of
way of doing things
and so early on we were fortunate to
have
uh i would say patient investors and a
long-term outlook in the company
to be able to say the first phase is
really about getting developers to
understand
and love and adopt this new way of doing
things that was really you know a
database built for developers by
developers in many ways
but at the same time there was very much
a business focus
around that strategy to say if we drive
large-scale
open source adoption this would lay the
foundation
for essentially monetizing that base so
think of it as the very foundation or
the very top of our funnel
it really starts with that open source
distribution model and the company spent
a lot of time on grassroots sort of
tactics to really drive that early
flywheel effect in the early years from
2009 onwards to
2012. and then from a modernization
standpoint as we really started to think
about how to turn this into a viable
business
it was largely around what are the
things we can build
that help customers use our technology
at scale but that they will be willing
to pay for right because
in order we have this sort of tension
because on one hand we want to drive as
much value into the free product for
developers as possible so it gets
broad spread adoption that people really
think they can bet their companies
they're taking you know their
applications on it
and so there's a and desire to push more
and more technology into the free
version
but then there's this business reality
that we have to drive revenue as well
off the backs of free product so how do
we figure out where that line is that
was you know a big part of the constant
iteration that happened in the early
productization of
mongodbu for driving revenue for our
business and so
a lot of that is licensed very
differently you know we it's a
proprietary license people have to pay a
subscription license to the company to
get access to that functionality to
manage operate scale mongodb
and then you know if you look at sort of
the early rise of that monetization
methodology
around you know 2016 or so it was really
about scaling that
but the where our revenue really came
from was only in the
top segment of the market and the reason
i bring this up is
mongodb's adoption and product market
fit for our free
technology serves the entire market
every segment
every vertical you know almost every
country in the world
in terms of the data we have around
where it's being used
but in terms of monetization and revenue
we were largely concentrated
in large enterprise because the
proprietary features we had to build
around the database that customers were
paid for
were naturally a fit for large companies
regulated companies
and less so for you know mid-market and
smb businesses
we're relatively kind of concentrated
and what that meant is from a
distribution strategy from a revenue and
go to market strategy
it meant that we were underserving the
value we were delivering
to the overall market and we did have
sort of an inside sales team you know
the corporate team that javier runs
today
at that time but in many ways we were
asking them to take on a really hard job
of taking you know really sophisticated
enterprise software
you know that was priced as such and
trying to find you know sort of a needle
in the haystack
down in smaller companies and startups
that had some more requirements and
would
be willing to pay for it javier i know
you have some color on this obviously
having lived it and you know especially
some of the folks that have been on your
team a while any color you want to add
there
yeah for sure i think the value of the
database is the parent and the adoption
of the open source version
obviously and so there's a reason i came
here and you came here as well but
product market fit to monetization was
much more complex from a sales
perspective the the leverage that we had
the pool were things like support
which is where many open source
companies start tooling a commercial
license or additional features that we
wanted to offer
but then you're almost selling insurance
rather than a product that could attach
to things like time to market
or using technology as a differentiator
so this made it
really difficult to grow the sales force
but especially in the sub 1 billion
dollar space like you dad mentioned to
here
made it really difficult for us so we
couldn't sell subscription licenses to
the next low code
no code unicorn or the gaming studio
that was all in on gcp
but i think there was another factor
that also made the the sale even more
complex
uh i mentioned we were playing from um
from behind
but uh you know i see here i know if you
want to talk about the monetization
aspect of it but
those things really made the open source
model for us difficult
yeah and i think beyond i would say the
the segment fit i think javier that
you're really kind of putting some good
color around
there was also this aspect that our
software solution that we sell
tends to really be focused on the tail
end of an application's life cycle you
know for for companies building
applications there's a whole
design development prototyping phase you
know there's a lot of testing that
happens
and most of the time customers are
absolutely using free technology open
source technology like mongodb for those
early phases
and they may only be willing to pay for
that application's functionality
later in the game when it goes into
production they need help from the
experts that build the technology they
need capabilities to secure it
to monitor it to manage it and so the
reason i bring this up
is we have sort of two vectors where we
were effectively
under monetizing our total value to
customers one was this concentration of
product market fit for our proprietary
technology at the top of the market
the other was if you kind of plotted out
the app life cycle we were really only
monetizing the tail end
of that application when it got to
production and so those are things that
were very much
top of mind at the company you know five
six years ago
as we were trying to figure out you know
how do we reach even more customers
on top of that you know there was
obviously a secular trend towards cloud
adoption and as we looked at where
mongodb the free version
or commercial software were being
deployed it was obvious that the
majority of the workloads
then and increasingly more so in the
future were going to be in public cloud
platforms
so those are you know very much things
at the executive team level the board
level that really drove this sort of
transition
and anyways massive expansion of our
strategy to really become
a sas company and you know that was
about four and a half years ago
yeah and if i could add just from a
sales perspective there to here yeah
when prospecting the customer had
already adopted best practices to manage
the core technology in our database
um or they were using other open source
products to strengthen their security or
backups or use third-party company for
support so it made it really difficult
from a sales strategy when we were
playing offense
but also most times they were in either
end like you mentioned or very close to
production so
the customers act when the customers
actually came inbound to sales
we were relegated to price only
discussions without the ability to
multi-thread into other stakeholders or
line the business initiative so
it ultimately led for us from a sales
perspective again to poor contracts or
steep discounting
uh and we ultimately had to dig out you
know dig out of those years later
absolutely so as we made that decision
to pivot to sas
i think one of the things that uh worked
really well and i'm you know in
hindsight being 2020 i'm really happy we
paid a lot of attention to
was the fact that this wasn't just going
to be a different version of our product
you know maybe hosted and delivered as a
service as our core
you know enterprise commercial software
we recognized early that
sas would allow us to fundamentally
expand and diversify
our go to market strategy you know in
many ways uh
we had built a lot of muscles and
sophistication on the kind of right-hand
side of this slide which is like
direct enterprise field sales but as
javier mentioned we were really still
figuring out the inside sales model due
to the product market fit and other
challenges that we had
and we had effectively zero self-service
business we didn't have a product that
developers could come onto in a b2c like
model swipe a credit card
and start consuming in a pay-as-you-go
model so we spent a lot of time
studying you know these are just example
companies that you know are
in some cases best in class in these
different models to understand
how we could evolve and diversify our go
to market strategy by learning from the
outside
and we put as much attention to that as
we did the product
road map or learning how to operate you
know at scale as a sas company you know
from a technology side
and i think that's really important you
know this shift of you know
sas is for companies that start nut sas
like we did you know i think the
go-to-market angle of it sometimes
gets less attention and tends to just be
like a different sku or a different
product that gets sold that and we
fundamentally believe that you have to
go hand in hand
and so for us the other angle of this
three channels was it allowed us to
reach
our entire market you know we talked
about who were sort of limited in our
addressable monetization for those
factors above or earlier
but we also had you know a huge market
that we just can't reach with feet on
the ground with sellers you know in the
field for example so
the idea of being able to serve a you
know
tens of billions of dollar database
opportunity for us
meant that we couldn't just rely on a
single distribution strategy you know we
needed uh you know inside sales to cover
mid-market customers and long-tail
customers we needed a self-service model
because it's how developers increasingly
wanted to
you know purchase and try technology out
and
what we saw from our funnel in terms of
our open source downloads our web
traffic all of that is our audience was
really global
so even if we wanted to go hire hundreds
of sales reps as fast as we could
there's an operational pace that just in
a hiring pace and quality bar that we
want to maintain that
it's a natural limiting factor so this
idea of diversifying into a
multi-channel strategy was really around
reaching our full opportunity and it's
also about efficiency
because you know when we're selling to
the enterprise there's
a certain sort of bar of entry in terms
of average sales price and
you know arr of a customer that we you
know we need to see to make it
economically make sense for us
but now we were able to target customers
at all spend levels
you know a new startup that just wants
to start off on the free tier
or you know maybe a hobby developer
trying out a new project that may only
be
spending five or ten bucks you know on
the product you know you can't serve
that with
a highly you know fence commissible
salesforce guy like javier's team so
how do we get that reach these were all
things that were sort of top of mind for
us that were
conversations that were only possible
because we had this new sas approach to
delivering our product so javier is
going to kind of double click
into these channels and some of the
dynamics that we've seen over the last
few years
before we get into some of the other
changes that we had to make
yeah definitely so with our self-service
channel
you know open source will and always be
our top of funnel just like to hear said
but
that's gonna drive adoption and just get
overarching
eventual uh lead into our sas product
but the self-service channel really
opens up the modernization angle
earlier on in the software development
lifecycle and more importantly though
with our sas product we took the
plumbing out of managing the database so
now
what would be a developer architect that
was would have historically downloaded
a community version of our product into
aws and tried to the database
now they can do that but give them the
ability to spin up clusters wherever
they want use monitoring tools to help
them use the product better
have toggles for features like security
that keep them from having to write
additional layers of code
things like that in our self-service
channel really helped drive adoption
early on and i think in sales we often
think we should talk to every lead or
every
person that is interested we typically
operate from the stance and i think it
was henry ford that said
if i would have asked people what they
wanted they would have you know wanted
faster horses but with sas in a
product-led growth strategy
technology becomes the way uh to begin
to try and use the product the
self-service channel
really allows the customer to prosper
which all leads to a better customer
experience and really
just the start of their customer journey
with in which we then begin to see
customers with more ambitious intentions
that need to align the sales which leads
me to our inside sales team
so similar similar to to uh most
sales teams uh the our inside sales
teams they they prospect for new
customers they manage customers they
sell professional service things of that
nature
but i mentioned earlier that with open
source we really lack product market fit
to monetize the demand it was really
mostly due to the
lack of back end of the software
development lifecycle
because we were working with customers
that were about to go into production
and the fact high growth companies
weren't looking to invest in ways to add
more process into their technology
everyone wants to move everybody wants
to move fast everybody wants to be agile
the less technology is the better thus
you've seen you know a a
high increase of low code and no code
software so with a sas offering and the
tailwinds of the cloud
innovative digital design platforms
gaming studios
many companies like the ones that are
speaking at faster to be honest with you
began exploring sas so this allowed our
inside sales team to begin find to find
success
but i think there's one caveat at
which is which is important
and most go to market strategies the
thought of the inside sales team is an
overlay or more transactional team
and most certainly while the the deals
are quicker at
on the inside sales side because of the
culture of the company
the inside sales org has applied
enterprise level deal qualification to
an inside sales motion
which has led our inside sales team to
be highly productive
landing multiple six and seven figure
deals for our enterprise team
uh i mentioned tailwinds earlier but all
of the tailwinds combined
arguably the biggest one of them all in
the world right now it's the push of the
cloud
it's really a modern day technology
renaissance if we look at it from the
big picture
so while thousands of companies are
being founded to disrupt or find new
markets in in the sub billion dollar
space
this means the enterprises are finding
ways to to try to keep up or stay ahead
so launching new applications replacing
their applications
or just modernizing their applications
with new technologies that allow them to
move faster
where in an open source world we would
be the subscription license that slapped
over the top of a big legacy
modernization project
the sales team now has been able to
attach some of the biggest initiatives
in the world
and be a part of the planning process so
as you can see here over half of the
global 100
you know are looking at at atlas but
also several extremely large banks or
even like a square index which is a
massive gaming studio in europe
all looking for modernization because
moving to the cloud
doesn't mean sas and i think many
companies sometimes struggle with that
this offers our best-in-class sales org
to allow
to attach to those initiatives and uh
and because because once we tie
ourselves to the people that are
involved when managing the database in
the cloud
the process is required and the
technology to script and automate in the
cloud uh
you know when for an enterprise when the
anti-waterfall light bulb goes off
uh atlas becomes a clear differentiator
and
javier i'll add one of the things i
think we were lucky to have
in the culture of the sales organization
both on the
inside sales team and then uh also now
the field sales team as they've you know
really scaled up into leading with our
cloud solutions is
this idea of iteration and agility that
you know people typically associate with
software development
but we've embraced that in our go to
market i can remember you know every
quarter we're learning what's working in
cloud sales what's not what do we need
to tune in terms of incentive structure
contract models you know those types of
things such that we could get that
you know that flywheel that motion that
belief within the sales organization
going
so i think that's a really important
piece is to not just be too beholden to
the model that work for software because
what works for cloud is completely
different
yeah 100 i think that's that's
definitely what makes our journey
uh with product and sales uh a different
one from from the standard like silicon
valley
journey which is you know we started as
an open source company and then switched
to sas i mean
it's hard to find examples like that
that there are
you know in our space at the moment and
so you know what what this one is really
speaking to and
and so here it showed the slide earlier
around being tied to the end of the
production life cycle
because we're able to see customers
earlier in their process through our sas
product
and to a sophisticated growth team we
can bubble the right accounts to the
right people at the right time while not
disrupting or introducing friction to
the customer journey so now
we're part of you know after the the
idea comes to fruition and design and
prototype
and the customer starts to look to
develop their software that's when we
start to see the product signals and
and um and atlas and and i know for you
so here this is a big push for you early
on and
i don't know if you have any color
here that you want to add
yeah and i think it does you know i look
at this as tying back to our opportunity
size for monetization you know we talked
about that kind of area under the curve
of an application
the value of a sas solution is so
different
than the software side of things in an
open source model that
customers you know i remember going into
salesforce and finding accounts that
had qualified out and said we're good
with your free version there's no reason
we need to pay you a commercial license
for you know the management tooling the
you know this expertise and skills that
you can back us up with if something
goes wrong we're good
but those same accounts came back later
and said oh you have a sas service now
this is what i always wanted
and are perfectly willing to spend you
know high dollar amounts with us to get
that value so
that fundamental shift means that we are
you know sort of area under the curve
that we can monetize starts much
earlier and to your point we can enable
a more successful customer journey with
our uh with the
with our technology with our company and
our business because we can help them
early on
get those best practices in and sort of
evolve with them as opposed to coming in
later
after the app's been built we have no
relationship with them and trying to
you know ultimately see you know be that
insurance policy that they were uh
potentially willing paid for to pay for
yeah yeah you never saw that in my sales
force though right
no but uh so
so look so so because because many
believe over sixty percent of the buying
decision is made before ever engaging
with the vendor
you have to as a company be
sophisticated and build signals across
multiple channels marketing growth
sales and and so what this slide really
talks to is and
and how it's relevant to is idc
has a stat that over the next three
years over 500 million applications get
built
more than 40 more than the previous 40
years combined and so we believe
as you know one of the biggest risks in
our organization is not focusing on
driving best practices and feature
adoption early
and so this can be done with the product
like the here has been talking about
uh but we took it even further uh for us
and uh and we built a team that sits in
between the self-service channel and the
sales team then we call that team the
cloud team so when we say we're blurring
the lines between channels
we're really blurring the lines in
regards to responsibilities and
and um and ownership so because most of
these customers come from a different
background for us
we are the disrupters the customers know
that uh how to properly use our product
would lead them to
you know if they didn't know how to use
the product properly sorry uh it would
lead them to throw more hardware at
query errors or lead them to higher
costs and eventual churn
which is the value of the team that we
created so being able to act on leading
indicators or bad behavior
sell professional services educate the
customers and mass
early on in their life cycle you know we
thought about this team as like a
long tail csm with product signals and
mql so
what's been interesting as a sales
organization as the lines have started
to blur
is the less we try to sell contracts or
annualize customers for growth
and acv and instead focus on future
adoption and education
the more we see increased retention
we've seen multiple six seven figure
deals come from the cloud motion across
all sales channels and when you see
those kind of results that's the omni
channel strategic sales strategy that
make you really want to think about
how do you how do you attack different
segments of your market in different
ways
uh that's truly an omni self an omni
channel uh
uh strategy that we want to drive so
it's not just self service and it's a
major drive
driver of our growth sales organization
so if i was you know because the fellow
sales leaders are out there that are
watching this
um i think that i think the advice i
would give is to to be customer centric
and less
about um you know trying to go after you
know a typical sales motion but be part
of the the transformation and the
journey
that the customer is going through with
you and and uh and and
be a part of the leading indicators that
that we know that drive success within
the product
yeah and i'd add that this you know it's
easier
said than done i mean this requires some
significant
changes in terms of you know how the
company thinks about cash flow
how the company thinks about profile of
sellers and you know it's almost more of
a customer success style profile perhaps
more technical in some of these phases
and you know uh the way the comp models
actually work and so
getting consensus and tuning those
incentives such that you know these
channels are
additive to each other and not creating
channel conflict or cannibalization
between them
is an important part of sort of the
pieces that need to be thought through
very carefully to do this right and you
know it looks uh
quite easy and linear and
straightforward on a slide like this but
that's the part that uh that takes you
know the hard iteration the large
lessons
and honestly the the management
leadership to take some risk and try
some new approaches and
thankfully for us um you know we this
has worked well and we're kind of
leaning in even more to this kind of
transformation
now i'd say you know this talk is
largely focused on
sort of how sales interacts with the
product shift to sas
and diversification go to market
strategy but in general for
for software companies that are
embarking on a sas transformation like
this
it really is a company-wide
transformation and so it's not just
sales and you know the distribution
model that changes but
you know things like product led growth
how do you drive more virality and
upsell and acquisition from the product
itself
you know growth marketing we refactored
the way our marketing organization was
structured incentivized to
you know constantly be obsessing around
experimentation in data
and you know that's not only you know
skill set change but it's culture change
it's technology change it's investment
in analytics it's
uh you know a very different way versus
a traditional kind of b2b marketing kind
of focus that we have you know three or
four years ago prior to having this ass
business
you know i mentioned finance needs to
change you know uh you know whether it's
different styles of contract you know i
like to to think that um
a consumption-based cloud business is as
different from a subscription software
business which is kind of our transition
as 10 years ago perpetual software was
to
subscription you know it's that
fundamental of a difference
in terms of the economics and customer
incentives and how you want to align
your organization
around that and finally you know
obviously on the product and engineering
side
the fact that we went from being a you
know a technology company that sells a
mission-critical database which is
naturally conservative in the way we
have to build it
and make sure it's ultra robust in terms
of scalability stability security
now we've been able to really move
things much more quickly
into market to iterate faster and get
that feedback just like any other sas
company or the value of getting those
signals and so
you know our advice to any software
company going on this journey is
invest in that instrumentation and those
analytics early because
the sooner your go to market teams or
your product organization or your
engineering organization can learn from
what's happening around that consumption
the better decisions you're going to
make along the entirety of the value
chain that a business delivers
so you know it is very much thought of
and
has been for mongodb a company
transformation
not just a product shift or not just a
sales motion chip it's been a complete
company
you know evolution uh to get to this and
that's how a transformational force on
our business um we had our
earnings uh call last night you know our
cloud business is growing over 60
you know year over year it's now 47 of
our total company revenue
and you know that's competing against
the software business that's also doing
extremely well you know in
the enterprise so you know we really
have this
dynamic of multiple you know growth
engines in the company with cloud
obviously growing uh
quite fast we see in a massive expansion
of customer reach
you know so what we're showing here is
you know the total number of paying
customers in the company has really
skyrocketed
since we've launched our cloud products
so the brand relationship
the economic relationship we have now
has just so much
you know reached comparatively to just
that top down selling that we had in the
past
and that overall volume has fed our
ability to have more direct sales
engagement so you see that sort of spike
really in direct customer acquisition as
well
being fed from the cloud self-service
model feeding our sales engines
really starting to see that flow through
and create that flywheel effect that i
hinted at earlier
and net net i mean for us it took us
about a hundred
uh to get to 100 million took our
company about 10 years
you know and granted there was a lot of
adoption that needed to happen there you
know a lot of early development of our
technology so it's not a perfect apples
to apples comparison but it took us 10
years to get to that 100 million sort of
ar run rate
and it took us another four years to get
to 500
and i think if you ask anyone who's
watched mongodb been at the company
you know um you know but part of this
change there's no question
that that shift to sas has been um
really the
core tenet of what's driving that
acceleration and expansion of our
business
uh worldwide and that you know that has
massive long-term effects in terms of
perception of the brand and you know
the ability for us to expand our
portfolio and drive
even more of that adoption of the open
source we've seen all of these things
across the board sort of really
accelerate
foundationally because of this pivot
that we've had
and so you know i think this top uh
takeaway here that sas is the most
powerful way to monetize open source is
by you know by now not at all
controversial in the market but
mongodb i hope is a good sort of proof
point of you know the possibility of
that and hopefully some of the things
that javier and i
talked about are you know informative on
your own journey
and i think you know javier made a
really good point that thinking it's
not it sounds so obvious but it's so
hard to do like think
what benefits the customer first and
adapt your go to market
around that instead of this sort of more
historical enterprise software model of
creating tension between the
organization to monetize and you know
drive a deal transaction at the front
end of that relationship i think it's
just the wrong way
we'd think about it and for us we don't
think ourselves of ourselves as an
enterprise software
does you know distribution model or a
self-service distribution model or any
one of those
we're really trying to master all of
those distribution models and
you know there's a whole other angle
with partners that we're not touching on
today
and so you know this internal term we
use of kind of omni-channel distribution
you know we're really trying to build
something that's good at all those
different models because we're
in a market where you have large banks
that are going to buy
on a you know large committed contract
from a very sophisticated sales force
just like we have
millions of developers that want to try
and use our product for free
without anyone involved so we really
have to serve you know both
both sides of that equation effectively
and i think you know that really touches
on to our last point the
intersection of sales and product led or
marketing led acquisition
is a big part of where our iteration is
happening on today
you know uh the last two years was
largely around optimizing each of those
channels independently
then now in the next few years is about
sort of that
interaction point in making sure that
they all feed off each other
in a way that's great for the customer
and ultimately maximizes our return from
the market
so hopefully we covered a lot of ground
but hopefully that was valuable
yeah getting some great comments and
feedbacks from panelists so many nuggets
of gold so thank you both
and thanks everyone for joining
[Music]
you